Fa Inni Qarib: Unveiling the Nearness of Allah Through the Quran

In the darkness of the night, when you feel overwhelmed by the troubles and worries of this life, beaten up by the uncaring waves of the worldly ocean, a whisper stirs in your soul, “Fa inni Qarib”. A promise from Allah ﷻ, that He is always near, His divine presence, the lighthouse of solace and guidance, is closer than your own breath.

وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا ٱلْإِنسَـٰنَ وَنَعْلَمُ مَا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِۦ نَفْسُهُۥ ۖ وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ ٱلْوَرِيدِ ١٦

Indeed, ˹it is˺ We ˹Who˺ created humankind and ˹fully˺ know what their souls whisper to them, and We are closer to them than ˹their˺ jugular vein. (Surah Qaf: 16)

This book, "Fa Inni Qarib," is an invitation to navigate that nearness. This book is not just ink on paper, it's a bridge. A bridge made of heartfelt supplications that takes you away from the world of doubt, anxiety and despair, leading you towards the tranquil shores of faith, trust and serenity. It's an invitation to step into the warm embrace of Allah's nearness, to feel the caress of His love in every beat of your heart.

Within these pages, you'll discover:
•	The balm of healing for you heart, soul and body. Uncover how the Quran's wisdom soothes anxieties, mends broken spirit, offers cure and comfort in the face of life's tempests.
•	A treasure of duas and adkar. Dive deep into the supplications embedded within the Quran, guided by the sunnah of the Messenger ﷺ and the inspiring stories of the previous prophets. Immerse yourself in the invocations of the pious predecessors and find your voice echoing within the divine chorus.
•	A vivid tapestry of imagery. Travel with us on this vibrant path as we describe the Quranic verses through inspiring imagery leaving a lasting impact on the canvas of your imagination, igniting a spark of understanding and developing a lasting connection with this sacred text. 

Embark on the journey. Discover the nearness. Let "Fa Inni Qarib" be your guide.

Quran is the light for the pure heart, the guidance for the lost soul and the Mercy for the believers. It is a living miracle given to our Prophet ﷺ, a miracle that we can experience in our daily lives. Narrated Abu Huraira:
The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "Every Prophet was given miracles because of which people believed, but what I have been given, is Divine Inspiration which Allah has revealed to me. So I hope that my followers will outnumber the followers of the other Prophets on the Day of Resurrection." (Sahih Bukhari: 4981)
We learn through Quran and Hadith that it is also a healer, a shifa for our spiritual, emotional and physical ailments. 
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ قَدْ جَاءَتْكُم مَّوْعِظَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَشِفَاءٌ لِّمَا فِي الصُّدُورِ وَهُدًى وَرَحْمَةٌ لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
Yaaa aiyuhan naasu qad jaaa’atkum maw ‘izatum mir Rabbikum wa shifaaa’ul limaa fis sudoori wa hudanw wa rahmatul lilmu’mineen
O mankind! there has come to you an advice from your Lord, and a cure for the ailments of your hearts, and guidance and mercy for the believers. (Yunus:57)
وَنُنَزِّلُ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ مَا هُوَ شِفَاءٌ وَرَحْمَةٌ لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۙ وَلَا يَزِيدُ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا خَسَارًا  
Wa nunazzilu minal quraani maa huwa shifaaa’unw wa rahmatul lilmu;mineena wa laa yazeeduz zaalimeena illaa khasaaraa
We send down the Quran as healing and mercy to those who believe; as for those who disbelieve, it only increases their loss. (Isra:82)
In this book our aim is to take a deeper look into the duas and adhkar of the Holy Quran. We will start by understanding the power of dua and how Allah ﷻ emphasises the idea of dua in the Quran. 
وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ ۖ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ الدَّاعِ إِذَا دَعَانِ ۖ فَلْيَسْتَجِيبُوا لِي وَلْيُؤْمِنُوا بِي لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْشُدُونَ 
Wa izaa sa alaka ‘ibaadee ‘annnee fa innee qareeb, ujeebu da’wataddaa’i izaa da’aani falyastajeeboo lee wal yuminoo bee la‘allahum yarshudoon
When My slave ask you about Me, then (tell them that) I am near. I respond to call of the caller when he calls Me; so they should respond to Me, and have believe in Me, so that they may be guided (Surah Baqarah:186)
This ayah is a source of immense comfort and solace for the believers. Allah ﷻ, the Most High, the Most Merciful, the Most Generous, assures us that He is near to us and listens to our supplications. He does not turn away from us or ignore us, but responds to us “whenever” we call Him. Unlike the worldly authorities, who are often inaccessible, arrogant, or indifferent, Allah ﷻ, the King of kings and the Lord of the worlds, is waiting for us to ask Him. He is the One who has everything in His control and can grant us anything we desire. So, let us not hesitate or despair, but turn to Him with sincerity and hope, and He will surely answer our prayers.
وَقَالَ رَبُّكُمُ ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ
Wa qaala Rabbukumud ‘ooneee astajib lakum
And your Lord says, "Call upon Me; I will respond to you” (Ghafir:60)
Du’a is very important in Islam, so much so that the Prophet   ﷺ said:  
“Du’a, is worship.” Then he recited the ayah: And Your Lord said: “Call upon me, I will respond to you. Verily, those who scorn My worship, they will surely enter Hell humiliated." (Al-Trimdhi:3372, Grade:Sahih)
Narrated Salman Al-Farsi رضي الله عنه the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said: 
“Your Lord is munificent and generous, and is ashamed to turn away empty the hands of His servant when he raises them to Him” (Abu Dawood 1488, Grade:Sahih)
So dear Muslims! Never shy away from making dua no matter how small and insignificant and how big and impossible it may seem. Ask!! Because Allah ﷻ promised that He will respond. 
 
Best Time to Make Dua
Dua is a precious gift from Allah ﷻ that we can avail at any time, but there are some special occasions and times when our supplications are more likely to be accepted by Him ﷻ. Our Prophet ﷺ has taught us about these blessed moments and encouraged us to make the most of them.
Dua in the depths of the night 
The last one third of the night is the most valuable time when offering the tahajjud prayer has the most reward. Narrated Abu Huraira رضي الله عنه Allah's Messenger ﷺ said:
"Our Lord, the Blessed, the Superior, comes every night down on the nearest Heaven to us when the last third of the night remains, saying:" Is there anyone to invoke Me, so that I may respond to invocation? Is there anyone to ask Me, so that I may grant him his request? Is there anyone seeking My forgiveness, so that I may forgive him?"
 (Sahih Bukhari: 1145) 
Between the adhaan and the iqaamah
It is narrated by Anas ibn Malik رضي الله عنه that the Prophet ﷺ said: 
“A du’a offered between the adhaan and iqaamah is not rejected.”                      (Abu Dawood-521, Grade: Sahih)

The last tashahhud of the Salah
Making dua in the last tashahhud of Salah just before the salaam, is another prescribed time according to the sunnah of the Prophet ﷺ. Muhammad bin Abi Aisha رضي الله عنه narrated that the Messenger of Allah ﷺ said: 
“When any one of you recites the Tashahhud, let him seek refuge with Allaah from four things – from the punishment of Hell, the punishment of the grave, the trials of life and death, and the evils of the Dajjaal, then let him pray for himself for whatever he wants.” 
(Sunan an Nasai:1310, Grade:Sahih) 
